Hello everyone. Today we're going to
learn about spelt kit's most powerful
feature, route data loading. Up until
now, we've been working with static data
or data that we fetch directly in our
components. However, SmeeltKit provides
a much more elegant and efficient way to
handle data loading through the load
function. Route data loading is
essential for creating performant web
applications. Instead of fetching data
after your page renders, which can cause
loading flickers and poor user
experience, SVLEKit allows you to load
data before the page even renders. This
means your users get a complete page
right away rather than seeing empty
states that gradually fill with content.
In this tutorial, we'll explore the load
function, learn how to fetch data
efficiently, handle errors gracefully,
and understand data invalidation. By the
end of this lesson, you'll be able to
create robust datadriven applications
that feel fast and responsive to your
users. So, let's learn about load
functions first. The load function is
SmeeltKit's primary mechanism for
fetching data before a page renders. It
runs on the server during serverside
rendering and can also run on the client
during clientside navigation. This dual
nature makes it incredibly powerful for
creating applications that work well
both with and without JavaScript
enabled. The load function is defined in
special files called plus page.ts or
pluspage.server.ts
files depending on whether you want it
to run on both client and server or only
on the server. When you use plus
page.ts, the function can run on both
sides while plus page.server.ts TS
ensures it only runs on the server which
is useful for sensitive operations like
database queries or API calls that
require secret keys. The load function
receives a context object that contains
useful information about the current
request including parameters from the
URL, the current URL object and various
utilities for fetching data. It must
return an object that contains the data
you want to make available to your page
component. So let's understand it with
an example in which we'll fetch data
from the API and display it on the page.
So first create a folder named users.
Then create a dynamic route folder named
id in it using brackets and then create
plus page.ts file in it. In it import
page load type from the types. If this
line gives error just run the app to
build the project and types will be
generated. Then create user interface.
Create ID,
name, email, phone and website
properties in it. Then create load
function of page load type and passps
and fetch parameters.
In it create a response variable and
initialize it with fetch method. This
method is used to fetch data from the
internet. Right now I'll use JSON
placeholder website to fetch dummy data.
From here I'll fetch users data. So I'll
copy this URL and paste it here in fetch
method. Now remove user ID and pass ID
from the permps to it. Then use if
statement to check if response is not
okay. In it throw new error along with
custom message. Then create user
variable of user type and initialize it
with response.json method. This API
provides ID, name, phone and website. So
these properties will be assigned to the
user variable because our interface only
contain these properties. Then return
user.
Now create plus page.spelt file
in it. Create script section. In it
import page data type from the types.
Then dstructure the data of page data
type using props rune.
Then in template create the block along
with tailwind classes for styling. Then
create heading. Then create another
block and in it render name using data
do user.name. Then render email, phone,
website.
Now run the app.
Now access the user's route and pass ID
as it is dynamic route and the user data
is fetched and displayed successfully.
Now try a different ID and another
user's data is loaded. This is how we
use dynamic routes and load functions.
Now let's talk about advanced data
fetching patterns. While basic data
fetching is straightforward, real
applications often need more
sophisticated patterns. You might need
to fetch multiple pieces of data
simultaneously, handle dependent
requests where one API call depends on
the result of another, or fetch data
that requires authentication. Smeelt
Kits load function excels at these
scenarios because it provides a
consistent interface for all types of
data fetching. You can use promise.all
method to fetch multiple pieces of data
in parallel. Use await statements for
sequential fetching when dependencies
exist and access cookies and headers for
authentication purposes. Another
important consideration is the
difference between serveron and
universal load functions. Serveronly
functions which are defined in plus
page.server.ts
have access to your server environment
including environment variables,
databases and file systems. Universal
functions which are defined in
pluspage.ts TS can run on both client
and server, making them perfect for API
calls that can be made from either
environment. Let's create a more complex
example that demonstrates fetching
multiple pieces of data and handling
dependencies. First, create a post
folder along with dynamic route named ID
and then create page.ts file in it.
Here, import type page load from types.
Then create user interface and create
ID, name and email properties in it.
Then create post interface and create
ID, title, body and user ID properties
in it. Then create comment interface
and create ID, name and email properties
in it.
Then create load function. Then create
post ID variable and initialize it with
perms ID. Then create two variables in
an array named post response and comment
response and initialize it with
promise.all method. This method takes
array of promises. It returns a single
promise that resolves when all promises
in the array have resolved. However, if
any promise rejects or fails, the entire
methods reject immediately. Right now,
we'll provide two fetch methods as
promises in an array to this method.
First fetch method will fetch post by
post ID and second method will fetch
comments of that post. Now both fetch
methods will run in parallel. If you
want to add more methods as promises,
you just need to add variables in the
array here and then you can add promises
corresponding to that variable. Next,
create if statement to check if post
response is not okay and in it throw new
error. Then create another if statement
to check if comment response is not okay
and in it throw new error.
Then create post variable of post type
and initialize it with post
response.json.
Then create comment variable of comment
array type because each post return
multiple comments.
Now initialize it with comments
response.json.
Then create author response variable and
initialize it with fetch method which
extracts the author of posts through
user id. Then create if statement to
check if author response is not okay and
in it throw new error. Then create
author variable of user type and
initialize it with author response.json.
Then return post author and comments.
Now create plus page.spelt file
in it. create script section.
Then import page data type from the
types. Then dstructure the data of page
data type object using props rune.
In template section, create a block and
tailwind classes for styling. Then
create article tag in it. Create H1 tag
and print post title in it. Then create
paragraph tag and print author name in
it. Then create another block and create
paragraph tag in it to print body of the
post. Then create section block under
article tag. Create H2 tag in it to
print comments.length.
Then create a block and use each block
in it which iterate over comments. In it
create a block and use H3 tag to print
comment. In it then create paragraph tag
to print email. Then create another
paragraph to print body of comment.
Right now there's an error because we
did not create body property in comments
interface. Once we add it, the error is
gone. Now run the app to test it. Now
access the posts route and provide post
ID and post is loaded along with
comments and author.
Let's load another post and second post
is also loaded.
This is how we can fetch data or perform
any operation simultaneously.
Now let's talk about error handling in
load functions. Error handling is a
critical aspect of data loading that can
make or break the user experience. When
load functions fail, users need clear
feedback about what went wrong and
ideally options for recovering from the
error. Smeelt Kit provides several
mechanisms for handling errors
gracefully. From simple error throwing
to sophisticated error pages and
recovery strategies. When you throw an
error in a load function, SpeltKit
automatically catches it and renders an
error page. You can customize these
error pages by creating plus error.spelt
files at various levels of your route
hierarchy. This allows you to provide
contextual error messages and recovery
options that match your application's
design and functionality. Smeelt Kit
distinguishes between different types of
errors. You can throw specific error
objects with status codes and messages,
which helps both users and developers
understand what went wrong. For example,
a 4004 error should be handled
differently than a 500 server error or a
network timeout. The framework also
provides tools for error recovery, such
as the ability to retry failed requests
or redirect users to alternative pages.
This is particularly important for
applications that rely heavily on
external APIs or services that might be
temporarily unavailable. Now let's
understand it with a code example.
First, we'll create profile folder along
with dynamic ID route and then create
plus page.ts file in it. Here
import error from spelt jskit
then import page load type from types.
As it is giving error we need to build
our app by running it once.
Now error is gone. Then create user
interface and create ID,
name,
email, phone and website properties in
it. Then create user posts interface and
create ID, title and body properties in
it. Then create load function.
In it create user ID variable and
initialize it with primid.
Then use if statement to check if user
id is null or it is not a number. In it
throw error along with status code. Then
create try block in it user response
variable and initialize it with fetch
method to fetch user details. Then use
if statement to check if status of user
response is 404. In it throw error along
with 404 status code. Then use if
statement to check if user response is
not okay. In it throw error along with
status code. Then create user variable
of user type and initialize it with user
response.json method. Then create posts
variable of array user post type and
initialize it with an empty array. Then
create a try block. In it create post
response and initialize it with fetch
method which fetch posts of user. Then
use if statement to check if post
response is okay. In it initialize posts
with post response.json method then
create else block. In it print error in
console. Then create catch block. In it
print errors in console again. Then
return user posts and has post error
property if posts length is zero.
And finally create catch block of outer
try block. In it use if statement to
fetch error is of instance of error and
has status property in it. In it throw
fetch error. Then print errors in
console and then throw error along with
500 status code.
Now create plus error.spelt file
in it. Create script section. Then
import page from app state. Then import
go to from app navigation. Then create
go back method. In it use history.back
method. Then create go home method. In
it use go to method to redirect to
homepage. Then create retry method. In
it use location.reload method. Then
create a block in template section.
Create two blocks in it. In it add SVG
image. Then create H1 tag and print
error message according to status code
using this turnary operator. Then create
paragraph tag and print error message in
it. And also add fallback error message
if error is null. Then create a block in
it. Create button call retry method on
on click property. Pass tailwind classes
and set button title. Then create a
button which handles go back method. And
finally add a button which handles go
home method.
Now create plus page.spelt file. Create
script section in it. Then import page
data type. Then dstructure the data of
page data type using props rune. Then
create a block in template section. In
it create another block. In it create H1
tag to print heading. Then create two
blocks. In it use H2 tag to print
heading. Then create a block and in it
print username, email, phone and
website. Then create another block and
create H2 tag in it to print heading.
Then use if block to check if has posts
error property is true. In it create a
block and then print the error message
using paragraph tag. Then use else if
block to check if posts array is empty
and use paragraph tag to print message.
Then use else block and create a block
in it. Then use each loop which iterates
over posts array and also use slice
method to get only first three posts
from array. Then create a block in it.
Then use h3 tag to print post title.
Then print post body using paragraph
tag.
Now run the app.
Now go to profile route and provide user
ID and user details are loaded along
with recent posts of the user. Now
change the ID and new user is loaded.
Now provide alphabet instead of a number
and we are redirected to error page. If
we click go back button, we are
redirected to previous page. And if we
click go home button, we are redirected
to homepage. This is how we handle
errors in load functions in spveltkit.
Now let's talk about data invalidation
and revalidation. Data invalidation is
the process of marking cache data as
stale and triggering fresh fetches when
needed. In Smeelt Kit, this is crucial
for keeping your application's data
synchronized with server state,
especially in dynamic applications where
data changes frequently. Smeelt kit
provides several functions for data
invalidation, each serving different use
cases. The invalidate all function
reruns all load functions on the current
page while invalidate function allows
you to selectively invalidate specific
URLs or patterns. There's also depends
which lets you create custom
invalidation keys for more granular
control. Understanding when and how to
invalidate data is essential for
creating responsive applications. You
might need to invalidate data after user
actions like creating, updating, or
deleting records. When receiving
real-time updates through websockets or
periodically to ensure data freshness,
SmeeltKit also provides automatic
invalidation in certain scenarios. For
example, when you submit a form using
SmeeltKit's form actions, related data
is automatically invalidated and
refetched. This ensures that users
always see the most current data after
performing actions. Now, let's
understand this with simple to-do app
example.
First create to-dos page and create plus
page.ts file.
Then import page load type from types in
it. Then create to-do interface. In it
create ID, title, completed and user ID
properties.
Then create export method and add
depends as parameter to it.
In it use depends method and pass a
string to it. It will act as our custom
dependency key. Then create response
variable and initialize it with fetch
method. Then go to this API and fetch 10
tooose.
Then copy this URL and paste here.
Then use if statement to check if
response is not okay. In it throw new
error along with error message. Then
create to-duce variable of to-do type
and initialize it with response.json.
Then return to deuce and last updated
property which returns date in ISO
string format. Then create plus
page.spelt file.
Then create script section in it. Then
import invalidate and invalidate all
from the app navigation. Then import on
mount from spelt. Then import page data
type from the types.js. Then dstructure
the data of page data type object using
props rune. Then create reactive auto
refresh property and set default value
to false. Then create reactive refresh
interval variable which is either of
type of set interval type or null and
set its default value to null using
state rune. Then create refresh to-duce
method and call invalidate method and
pass to list key which we pass to
depends method as dependency key in
Typescript page. Then create refresh all
method and call in validate all method.
Then create toggle to-do method which
takes to-do ID of number type and print
id in the console. In real world apps we
would make API calls here but for now we
are simply printing the ID and then call
invalidate method and pass dependency
key to it. Then create toggle autor
refresh method and use if state in it to
check if auto refresh is true. In it,
use another if statement to check
refresh interval and clear refresh
interval and set refresh interval to
null. In it and in outer if statement
set auto refresh to false. Then create
else block. Use refresh interval
variable and initialize it with set
interval method and call in validate
method and pass key to it and set timer
to 5,000 milliseconds and set auto
refresh to true. Then create onmount
method and use return method. In it, use
if statement to check if refresh
interval is not null and clear refresh
interval in it. Then in template section
create the block. Then create two more
blocks in it. Then create heading. Then
create a block and print last updated
date. Then create a block and create a
refresh to-do button and call refresh
to-do method on on click property. Then
create a button for refresh all method.
Then create a button for toggle auto
refresh method. Also use turnary
operator to check the buttons color
according to auto refresh variable. Then
create a block and use each loop in it
which iterates over to-dos. Then create
two blocks in it and create input field
of checkbox type. Then display title of
the to-do and then print to-do ID. Then
use if statement to check auto refresh
in it. Create a block and display the
message.
Then create dynamic id route and create
plus page.ts file in it. In it import
page load type from types.
Then create to-do interface and create
ID, title, complete and user ID in it.
Then create user interface and create
ID, name, email properties in it. Then
create load method and pass pums fetch,
URL and depends as parameters. Then
create to-do variable and initialize it
with pums do ID. Then use depends method
and set dependency key in it using to-do
ID. Then create another depends method
and pass our previous dependency key to
it. Then create third depends method and
pass URL as key to it. Then create array
of to-do response and user response and
initialize it with promise.all method.
In it use fetch method to get to-do
using id. Then use another fetch method
to fetch user. For now, I'm passing
hard-coded user ID. Then create if
statement to check if to-do response is
not okay. In it, throw new error. Then
create to-do variable of to-do type and
initialize it with to-do response.json.
Then create user variable of user type
and initialize it with turnary operator
which check when user response is good.
Then call user response.json method.
Otherwise create user object with
default values. Then return to-do user
and last updated property which return
the date in ISO string format.
Now create plus page.spelt file. Here
create script section. Then import
invalidate and go to from the app
navigation. Then import page data type
from types. Then dstructure the data
using props rune. Then create update
to-do method and use invalidate method
and pass key along with to-do id which
is the dependency key. Then create
delete to-do method and call invalidate
method and pass key to it. Then go to
to-dos route. Then create go back method
and use go to method to redirect to
to-dos page. In template section create
three blocks and display heading. Then
create button for go back method.
Then create two blocks and print heading
and title. Then create a block and print
heading in it. Then print status of the
to-do using the turnary operator.
Then create a heading and print heading
in it. Then print username and user
email. Then create a block and print
last updated date in it. Then create a
block and create button for update to-do
method.
Then create a button for delete to-do.
Now run the app.
Redirect to to-dos page. Here we can see
the to-dos in list format. Here are the
buttons for refresh, refresh all, and
auto refresh.
If we pass ID of the to-do, we can see
any specific to-do. This data
invalidation example demonstrates
several sophisticated patterns for
keeping data fresh in spelt kit
applications. In our to-dos page load
function, we use the depends function to
create custom invalidation keys. This
allows us to invalidate specific pieces
of data without reloading everything on
the page. This depends creates a
dependency key that we can reference
later when we want to invalidate just
the to-dos data. This is more efficient
than using invalidate all because it
only reruns the specific load functions
that depend on this key. In the to-dos
page component, we demonstrate multiple
invalidation strategies. The refresh
to-dos function uses invalidate with our
custom dependency key to reload just the
to-dos data. The refresh all function
shows how to invalidate everything on
the page, which might be useful when you
know that multiple pieces of data might
have changed. The toggle to-do function
simulates what would happen in a real
application when a user interacts with
data. After making an API call to update
a to-do status, we invalidate the to-do
data to ensure the UI reflects the
current server state. This pattern
ensures that users always see accurate
information after performing actions.
The autoeresh functionality demonstrates
how to implement periodic data updates.
We use set interval to automatically
invalidate the to-dos data every 5
seconds when autoerresh is enabled. This
pattern is useful for dashboards or
applications where data changes
frequently and users need to see updates
without manual intervention. The cleanup
logic in onmount ensures that we clear
any running intervals when the component
is destroyed, preventing memory leaks
and unnecessary network requests when
users navigate away from the page. In
the to-do detail page load function, we
show how to create multiple dependency
keys for granular control. We depend on
the specific to-do with to-do ID, the
general to-dos list, and even the
current URL. This allows different parts
of the application to invalidate
different aspects of the data as needed.
The URL dependency is particularly
interesting because it automatically
invalidates data when route parameters
change. This ensures that if a user
navigates from one to-do to another, the
data is always fresh for the new to-do.
The detail page component shows how
invalidation works across different
pages. When we update or delete a to-do,
we can invalidate both the specific
to-do data and the general to-dos list.
This ensures that when users navigate
back to the main to-dos page, they see
the updated data immediately rather than
stale cached information. This
comprehensive approach to data
invalidation ensures that your spelt kit
applications remain responsive and
always display current data while still
taking advantage of caching for better
performance. The key is understanding
which invalidation strategy to use in
each situation and implementing cleanup
logic to prevent resource weeks. And
that's all for this section.